[Music]
and here we go hello Sean hey John how's
it going thanks for being here again man
I really appreciate it so over the
weekend I got in your book whoo yes yes
it's great I mean I really appreciate
someone like you who's trying to break
down quantum mechanics and quantum
physics for someone like me it's very
hard to follow and there was a lot of
backing up and trying it again and
backing up and trying it again and like
going over paragraphs and trying to
figure out exactly what it means but
it's it's really excellent and really
perplexing at the same time well thank
you and you know it there are different
styles when it comes to writing popular
books I think there should be different
styles and my particular style is look
it's not gonna be a breezy page-turner
but if you read it carefully
like it's not prerequisites you don't
have to come into it as an expert but
you have to come into it is someone
who's willing to sit and think about
every paragraph and then hopefully
you'll be rewarding and you'll truly
understand what's going on after doing
that well it is rewarding because it is
fascinating and the history of quantum
physics is also pretty fascinating cuz
I've always wondered like how did
anybody even want to come up with this
stuff like yes and the fact that it was
so long ago
what the beginnings ever were in the
19th century right well 1900 is the
typical literally that year the turn of
the century when luck Splunk first got
the first hints of it and then yeah it
was took another 27 years to put it into
final shape now for regular people that
don't have a background of physics or
don't this is like the whole idea behind
it is so bizarre it's like why would
anybody try to figure out something that
one of the things that you said that's
really interesting is that you quantum
physics is used all the time it's used
with exact calculations but yet we don't
really understand it yeah yeah no that's
the main message of the book really
because physicists of course do quantum
mechanics
day whether it's you know straight
forward quantum mechanics quantum field
theory quantum information Kalam
computing clearly we're pretty good at
it you know like transistors and lasers
depend on quantum mechanics the sun
shining figuring that out depends on
quantum mechanics the Higgs boson etc so
to claim that we don't understand
quantum mechanics is a little bit weird
but then we have quotes from people like
Richard Feynman saying nobody
understands quantum mechanics right and
so if he says that then there's some
authority behind it and the reason is
what we have is sort of a black box
right we say you know what I think what
I said in a New York Times article I
wrote recently is physicists understand
quantum mechanics in the same way that
someone who owns a smartphone
understands the smartphone like they
know how to use the apps they can call
people they can make phone calls they
can take pictures they don't know what's
going on inside and that's physicists
with quantum mechanics they they use it
they can make very very precise
predictions but if you ask them what is
really going on like what's actually
happening what are all the details are
like yeah no that's not our job let's
just stick to prediction but to someone
like me that's so terrifying because
like the very nature of reality is being
examined by people like if it is a
smartphone it's being examined by people
like me yeah who don't really understand
the smartphone I have no idea what
what's going on inside a smartphone I've
no I know some words that have used to
describe Ram and process all the
electrons moving out of there right but
yeah yeah and I think and it's in some
sense that's fine like most of us don't
need to know what's going on inside the
smartphone to use it but somebody should
know right and my argument in the book
is look the if 500 years from now when
historians write the history of 20th
century physics they will say two things
one is my god these people were so
brilliant and creative to invent quantum
mechanics and then they were so afraid
to really take it seriously and try to
understand it like they said like stop
asking questions about the meaning of
reality and what the world is doing in
my mind what physics is all about is
understanding reality in what the world
doing it's not just about making
predictions making predictions is good
but we do that you know mostly because
we're curious about what the world is
doing well for people outside the world
of academia when I read someone like you
saying that you were discouraged from
pursuing this and you literally told
that you should be pursuing your work in
cosmology and gravitation is that's
where it's at a serious work yeah that
seems to me be so crazy it's like if
anybody should be pursuing it it should
be people like you you know I mean I
want to be fair
so of course twentieth century physics
was incredibly successful and and there
was part of the attitude was look we
have to understand nuclear physics and
particle physics and you know a lot of
it was the center of physics shifted
from Europe to the US and and Europe is
much more philosophical and you're
willing to think about the deep ideas
and Americans are pretty pragmatic and
want to build things right in particular
at the time they wanted to build nuclear
weapons and so the idea of just really
putting aside deep philosophical issues
and putting stuff to work was attractive
and the other issue is you know ok let's
say we do demand that we understand
quantum mechanics better how do you do
it like what experiment is it there that
you can do as far as we know the
cookbook that we have even though we
don't understand it works pretty well
like what what could you type into your
smartphone that would help you
understand what's going on inside it's
kind of hard to figure out so I think
those attitudes were wrong but at least
you know they're not completely crazy
it's not just that they were afraid of
the truth or anything like that and I
also think that it is finally changing
now I think that there's slowly slowly
slowly more people are appreciating the
understanding quantum mechanics is
important well what do you attribute
that to a couple of things one is I mean
there's good news and bad news that part
of the good news is technology has
gotten better so we're trying to build
quantum computers for example and guess
what you know some of the ad hoc rules
that we had for doing quantum mechanics
might not be up to the task we need to
understand the details a little bit
better the other sadder thing is that so
much of fundamental physics is kind of
stuck
right now right we haven't we literally
have not been surprised by a new
experimental result in fundamental
physics since the 1970s Wow the one
there's one exception to that which is
the universe accelerating in 1998 which
is the dark energy we have had amazing
accomplishments in experimental and
observational physics we've found the
Higgs boson we found the top quark we
found gravitational waves the microwave
background many many things but they
were all predicted decades ago right so
progress is driven by being surprised
and it's been a long time since we've
been surprised so some people including
myself say well one of the things to do
in that situation is to take a step back
and re-examine the foundations maybe
maybe we can take a broader look and
think that we were walking down the
wrong path
now for people that don't have any
background in physics there there's a
bit of an issue with public perception
and one of the things about public
perception is films like what the bleep
yeah that sort of throw this sort of
cultish monkey wrench into the you know
quantum physics is weird enough as it is
yeah without adding that that movie was
literally created by a channeler right
rest of mine David Albert was one of the
leading philosophers of physics I should
also give credit to philosophers here
because they have been taking quantum
mechanics seriously longer than the
physicists have to be honest so David is
one of many people who got a PhD in
physics and then switched to philosophy
because he cared about the foundations
of quantum mechanics in no physics
department would ever hire him right
hilarious and yeah I tell the story went
through the back door yeah I tell the
story in the book like he wrote a bunch
of influential papers as a graduate
student and then he went and said I
would like to you know make these papers
my PhD thesis and they said no that's
not really serious physics and they
punished him by making him write this
incredibly technical mathematical paper
on quantum field theory just to prove he
could do it and then he's like this I I
don't take this anymore I'm switching
fields but anyway he was in that film he
was in what the bleep and they lied to
him they misrepresented themselves he
said we're doing a documentary about
quantum mechanics and they sat him down
for three hours
and asked him all these questions your
leading questions like doesn't this mean
that we're bringing reality into
existence by looking at it and he's like
no that's not what it means let me
explain to you then in the final film
there's like 30-second clips of him
going yes that is a really important
question right
like completely misrepresenting what he
said and so he went public after that
and and complained about and about the
film and he did in a hilarious story
there was a event some sort of
convention put on in Santa Monica by
supporters of the film that they thought
would be fun to get all of the people
who were in the movie what the bleep do
we know and get them at you know and
talk to them and charge people money to
listen to them but these people were not
affiliated with the filmmakers so they
didn't know the David Albert had been
completely misrepresented in the film so
they invited him and he goes to this
event in Santa Monica and he gave a talk
you know he decided he wondered like
should I just go at all but okay look
why not
let's reach a different audience and he
he gave a talk and he said look there's
two things you can do when you are faced
with fundamental puzzles of reality
one is you can face up to what the world
is trying to tell you and you can accept
it and take it as what it is no matter
what you like the other is you can
choose to tell a flattering story about
yourself and the people who made this
movie have decided that the mysteries of
quantum mechanics are really stories
about how they are powerful and have
influence over reality and so forth but
it's all nonsense and the punchline is
the audience loved it they went nuts
because what they wanted was a guru of
some sort and like he was just as good a
girl right so yeah he had a better story
a reality based reality guru yeah yeah
yeah so I think you're right I mean I
think that quantum mechanics I've said
before is uh of all the theories in the
history of science the most easily
distorted and misrepresented in the
popular mind well you've done an amazing
job in this book of trying to boil it
down for dummies like me but it's hard
it is it is a complicated and insanely
nuanced subject
yeah and it's one of those things where
it like this many worlds theory
for one example the the the just the
possibility that there's like explain
that just explain for for people that
don't understand what quantum mechanics
even means give them just like a little
bit of that and then explain many worlds
theory yeah good this is what I'm here
to do so thank you you know an electron
take an electron quantum mechanics
should apply to the entire universe but
it becomes unmistakable when you look at
little tiny things right so we always
are talking about electrons or atoms and
so forth an electron has a position and
well sorry let me not even say that that
even that was wrong it's just so hard to
correctly talk about come on our
mechanics right if you were Isaac Newton
before there was quantum mechanics there
was classical mechanics and basically
quantum mechanics and classical
mechanics are the only two big
frameworks that have ever existed in
physics you know classical mechanics was
so good that everyone thought that was
just right and it's all better filling
the details until quantum mechanics came
along and changed things in classical
mechanics an electron is a point it has
a position a location in space and has a
velocity it's moving somewhere and from
that you can predict what's gonna happen
okay quantum mechanics says no no no the
electron has a wavefunction so if
there's a wave you know sometimes you
hear this debate about are things like
electrons and photons particles are
waves the answer is that they are waves
and the wave function has this weird
property that when you're not looking at
it it's a wave it's all spread out or
it's localized somewhere but it obeys an
equation the Schrodinger equation so far
so good just like regular physics
there's a thing the wave function it'll
be is an equation the Schrodinger
equation you can predict what's gonna
happen next
but the weird thing about quantum
mechanics is that there's a whole
separate set of rules for what happens
when you look at the thing when you
observe it when you measure it that's
where things get squirrely with people
describing it right yes and that's where
they want to go it's an opening to be
woowoo right when you say like what do
you mean
observe something like does have to be a
conscious being can it be a video camera
you know that's just right here right
is it the act of measuring that changes
things well this is the puzzle okay this
is what is called the mesh
ermand problem of quantum mechanics that
the rules we teach our students at
Caltech or anywhere else when we teach
them quantum mechanics in their
sophomore year of college the rules say
when a system is observed when it is
measured its state it's wavefunction
changes dramatically suddenly and
unpredictably now let me ask you this
how do we know this based on if if
you're measuring it and it changes how
do we know because we didn't measure it
before like what what observations are
we making that we understand the state
of it before its measured without
measuring it good there's a couple of
ways so let me make things even simpler
forget about where the electron is
located and think about the electron is
spinning right electron is spinning just
like the Earth spins it's really exactly
like that it's like a little spinning
top except when you measure the spin you
can sort of send the electron through a
magnetic field and it will get deflect
either up or down depending on whether
it's spinning spin up or spin down you
only ever get one of two answers it's
either going up or going down it's
nowhere in between this is an empirical
measured fact okay so that's a part of
quantum mechanics that that's the
quantum fact that there's discrete set
of possible answers to this question is
it spinning clockwise or
counterclockwise yes or no that's just
those two possibilities nowhere in
between so if you're if you have a
magnetic field that is oriented
vertically send your electron through it
it gets deflected up you say oh it's
spin up so now I've measured its spin
now I know what its state is if I send
it through another magnetic field or
oriented vertically it will always be
deflected up every single time we know
what it is we're gonna measure it
measuring it in this case doesn't change
it it's in exactly that state we know it
okay now let's send it through a
magnetic field that is oriented
horizontally so it's gonna be deflected
either right or left we know exactly
what state it's in it's spinning this
way but when you send it through that
magnetic field that's oriented
horizontally it gets deflected left or
right 50/50 unpredictably there's no way
we can predict it hmm and then once it
is so okay now it's been spinning up you
measured it spin left let's say send it
through another magnet that
is going vertically and now it's 5050
again it could be spin-up or spin-down
so somehow even though we knew exactly
what state it was in
we couldn't predict what would happen
next that is part of quantum mechanics
so the act of sending it through these
things where it makes it vertical or
horizontal in what is what's happening
to it when it's going through these
things so in quantum mechanics what we
say is that it's not that we don't know
whether the electron is bending
clockwise or counterclockwise
it can be in a superposition of both
that's just the spin version of the
position of the electron can be spread
out in a wave right it's it's truly not
just that we are lacking some knowledge
is that the knowledge really isn't there
and again this is how we teach quantum
mechanics and textbooks and then I'm
gonna correct it because many-worlds is
much better but this is the standard
textbook version there's a wave function
the wave function for a spin is it's
either up or down or some combination
and then there's a rule that says when
you measure the spin you only get up or
down you don't see the wave function
just like the cloud that you have for
the electrons position when you look at
it you see it at a location so another
way to get to make the same argument is
take a little piece of I have a nice
little image of this when I give talks a
little piece of uranium so it's a
radioactive a little chunk of metal and
you put it in a bubble chamber so it is
emitting radioactive particles and you
detect the particles you can see a
little streak of motion when the
particle leaves the uranium okay well
like I said when you're not looking at
it this electron is supposed to obey an
equation the Schrodinger equation and
you can ask what the prediction is when
when a radioactive nucleus decays and
gives off an electron
what is its wavefunction gonna do what
is the wave function of electron going
to be and the answer is it goes off in a
spherical wave if it goes off in all
directions at once
evenly yeah all directions evenly but
you never see that is that relevation
what shape of the piece of uranium does
it vary no because the electron gets
from one individual nucleus of an atom
right so the what they let well the
uranium is doing doesn't
it's just like one atom matters and the
easiest thing for the electron to do was
just to go out in a sphere doesn't have
to we can go out in higher energy states
but the point is it's not going out in a
straight line but when you look at it
you see a straight line right that's the
fundamental mystery of quantum mechanics
that how we describe the thing when
we're not looking at it is different
than what we see when we look at it so
when you're in pursuit of an
understanding a deeper understanding of
quantum mechanics what you when you
you're thinking about people from the
1900s that are just sort of basically
getting the first steps going to
understand this stuff when when you're
talking about this lack of funding and
the lack of encouragement for people to
pursue quantum mechanics you strongly
feel like there are answers to these
questions yeah that's right that we just
need better tools and a better
understanding better equations more time
yeah me and Einstein think this right so
Einstein is one of the secret heroes of
the book because he has this reputation
as someone who just couldn't quite
accept quantum mechanics the title
something deeply hidden is a quote from
Einstein when he was talking about when
he was a kid and he had a compass right
and he was giving his first magnetic
compass and he could rotate it this way
in that way and it always pointed north
and you and I would go huh
that's cool but he was Einstein he's
like wow this is amazing why how does it
know where north is right and he said
there must be something deeply hidden
that explains why it's doing this
mysterious thing and he felt the same
way about quantum mechanics that it we
have we gave these set of rules which
are called the Copenhagen interpretation
of quantum mechanics one set of rules
for when you're looking at it one set of
rules for when you're not and Einstein
was like oh come on clearly this is not
the final answer to the nature of
reality right he wanted to know God's
thoughts he's like I want to know
everything we're not done yet there must
be more going on and so many worlds is
one of the proposed answers to what
could be going on it's not the only one
there's alternatives but it's definitely
my favorite is definitely the easiest
one to write down let's put it that way
okay so hit us with this many worlds
theory okay so think about this electron
you're gonna you you say that it could
be either spin up or spin down it's a
combination
both that's its wavefunction you measure
it you only ever see spin-up or
spin-down so copenhagen says that's
because the wavefunction suddenly
changed snapped into place when you
observed it don't ask me what it means
to observe something that's not what
Copenhagen lets you ask okay many world
says what you're missing is two things
number one you're a quantum system you
are obeying the rules of quantum
mechanics you're made of atoms and
electrons and so forth you have a
wavefunction - okay so you're secretly
treating yourself as a classical thing
when you make that measurement but you
really should be treating yourself
quantum mechanically right that's one
thing and the other thing is something
that Einstein invented namely called
entanglement when quantum mechanics says
there's a wavefunction for a system it
doesn't say there's a separate
wavefunction for every particle right it
says that there's only one wavefunction
for the whole universe so the way I like
to say it is imagine two particles come
in and bounce off of each other either
one has a wavefunction and it's you know
unpredictable exactly what angle it's
going to go off at so both of them both
of the particles that go off you don't
know where they're going but because
momentum is conserved you if they came
in at equal velocities they'll go out of
equal velocities and nups at directions
if you measure one then you know where
the other one is going right
that's entanglement the observed state
of one system can be related to the
observed state of another system so
those are the two ingredients you're a
quantum system and quantum systems can
be entangled with each other so Hugh
Everett who was a graduate student when
he invented this idea in the 1950s said
look when you measure that electron what
happens physically like forget about
your person you're conscious all that BS
like you're a physical system you obey
the Schrodinger equation you you're a
quantum mechanical system you obey the
laws of physics so you look at the
electron your wave function changes it
used to be you're just a person doing
whatever you do but then after you look
at the electron you become entangled
with it and it splits so there is one
part of the wave function that says the
electron was spinning clockwise and you
measured it spinning clockwise
and there's another part of the wave
function that says the electron was
spinning counterclockwise and you saw it
spinning counterclockwise now everybody
knows this like that that far it's not
controversial at all that's clearly the
prediction of the equations of quantum
mechanics but everyone else said well
that means that I'm some weird
combination of I saw it spinning one way
and I saw it spinning the other way but
I've never felt that way when I look at
real electrons I see them one way or the
other
well that can't be right that can't be
the final answer the wavefunction must
somehow collapse and Evert said no what
you're missing is there's now two
separate worlds both of those part of
the wavefunction are real but they're
different worlds they will never
interact with each other again what
happens in one part of the wave function
will not affect what happens in the
other part so now there's a version of
you that saw the electron spinning
clockwise and there's another version of
you that's all it's bending
counterclockwise and no that's just
taking seriously the prediction of
quantum mechanics it's not adding any
extra stuff any extra worlds anything
like that that is the part where my
brain broke right the idea that there's
a you that observes it going clockwise
and the you that observes it going in a
different direction like that is so hard
to understand do you apply this in your
regular life like do you think like when
you go home and you say hi to your wife
and you look at the frigerator do you
think of yourself as this quantum being
that's existing in this super state so I
mean there's a couple of answers to that
one is you know sure if I think about it
like I really do believe it you know I
have a chapter in the book which my
editor resisted at first but then he let
me get away with it which is a dialogue
between a young philosopher and her
father who was a physicist and the
father is skeptical about all this
philosophical nonsense and she tries to
explain how many worlds works to him and
at the end you know his last question is
you know do you really believe this I
said you feel like taking this seriously
and look that's a perfectly at a good
question it's a very respectable
question because it is many worlds it's
not crazy or weird or bizarre but it's
certainly very very far away from our
everyday experience right so what it's
asking you to do is to say
I have these equations they are really
really good at fitting what I do observe
in the world and making predictions you
know I can build the Large Hadron
Collider etc I will take them seriously
even for things that I can't directly
observe because that the best equations
I have right until a better set of
equations come along I will believe
these equations and the implication of
that is yeah there's a whole bunch of
worlds like a huge number like a real
you know joy humongously unimaginably
big number maybe an infinite number
maybe finite we don't know of different
copies of you and their being created
all the time the good news is that it
doesn't really affect how you go through
your life it doesn't really imply that
you should behave any differently than
you would if you just lived in one world
but do you think of each choice that you
make possibly changing everything
about the world that you exist in how
how are you looking at it if you don't
I'm saying because you know you are a
guy who probably understands it as good
as anybody that's alive so as weird as
this stuff sounds to me it sounds like
an I mean it's almost impossible for me
to comprehend so I'm trying to filter it
through yeah your understanding of it
well I think that is jacket off we're
gonna see I know it's getting hot in
here you guys physics is heating us up
yeah I'm not exactly sure how to say it
the best you know it doesn't it doesn't
change who you are it's certainly not
true that you making a decision is what
branch is the wavefunction in the
universe I guess that's the right thing
to say because I want to stop all whoo
yeah you can happen everyone you know
believe the breaks the joke about how
certain political choices imply that
we're living in the wrong branch of the
wavefunction has been made many many
times but you it's not that your choices
create different universes different
universes get created and maybe you're
different in them by a little bit in
fact I you know I'd like to point out
there is an app you can download if you
have an iPhone called universe splitter
which will branch the wave function of
the universe for you and then if you
agree ahead of time to do one thing in
one branch and another thing in another
branch then there
we'll be multiple copies of you or
living different lives and then you can
deal with that in your therapist however
you like but what is the application
exactly doing what it's doing is a
basically a version of measuring the
spin of it's called universe glitter
universe splitters only for iPhones
sorry and people yeah sorry it's not
even a webpage is only a only an app
there's equivalent webpages but okay I'm
pulling it up right now yeah and what so
what you can do it basically it sends a
signal to a lab that coincidentally is
located in Geneva Switzerland but has
nothing to do with the Higgs boson or
anything like that they send a single
photon down a pipe to what's called a
beam splitter so the wave function of
the photon goes 5050 it gets sent left
it gets sent right and if you agree and
so then it sends back whether you ended
up in the branch of the wavefunction
where it went left or where there you go
199 come on yeah that's colors of
changing the universe is in your hand
download paid for it I got it right here
yeah right
so if you have any tough choices you can
type in like you know I want to have
pizza or I want to have Chinese food for
dinner tonight
well it says in one universe I will take
a chance in the other one I will place
oh yeah but you can you can correct
those you can fill in whatever you want
really yeah that's the good part what
what is what is happening what I will
ask her to marry me I will not ask her
to marry me I will accept this job I
will go somewhere else the equivalent of
a quantum fortune cookie yeah but except
that all possible fortunes in different
universes the bad news is you can't ever
find out how things went in the other
universe talks is a different universe
that's the problem right so the problem
will be paralyzed by analysis that's why
it's you should act the same as if you
just lived in one universe because you
can never talk to that people and the
other ones hmm so but now let's hit hit
the brakes on the whoo again yeah
because people would like to believe
that there are I mean are there an
infinite number of views existing at the
exact same time making various choices
which send you off in a different
directions so number one we don't know
if it's infinite number or just really
big but there's certainly a really
really big number it's
big enough to be you know big enough for
whatever you want but it's not
everything it's not the theory does not
say everything happens somewhere right
the theory says the Schrodinger equation
is obeyed there's an equation that is
obeyed so electrons will never convert
into protons because electrons are
negatively charged and protons are
positively charged and nowhere in the
Schrodinger equation can you violate the
conservation of charge right so there's
plenty of things that don't happen but
then there are plenty of things that do
happen and some things are more likely
than others for you to experience so
again it's it's sort of a you know it's
a mind-bending thing but it's a
straightforward prediction of the
equations and it doesn't affect our
lives if there's no rule that says you
know to be a moral person to be a good
utilitarian and make the world happy
knowing that the world the wavefunction
is branching into multiple copies I
should act it differently somehow it's
it's exactly the same as it would be in
the ordinary world so you and you are
the ordinary world no matter how copies
how many copies of you there are how
many versions of you there's nothing so
when all these copies are being made
there's no essence of you that is
traveling through one of the copies
right like all these people are separate
people so I use the analogy it's like
identical twins they were the same
zygote or whatever and now they're
different people okay so that's the same
thing like you're you now and if you hit
the button and branch the wavefunction
there'll be two different people both of
whom used to be you but not the same
person anymore because different things
happen to them now when people think
about the concept of quantum mechanics
and the way you're talking about
describing things in the micro and the
macro you think of your existence itself
very similar in a very similar manner
that the way you think of electrons the
way you think of things being quantum is
that you are a combination of all these
quantum things yeah so you don't operate
in some sort of static state that's very
like here and now and and carbon and you
could put it on a scale and it'll never
change
there's constant versions of you yeah
it's kind of like a whooshing where you
know more and more versions of you are
being created all the time
and it's a it's an interesting thing
because even the best trained physicists
sort of think intuitively classically
like look here's a table there's bottle
right yeah you had like some to the
breaks and this is how we evolved right
us how our brains work right and like I
said you know many-worlds is one
respectable version of quantum mechanics
there are other respectable versions
more respectable than the textbook
presentation but they all all the other
ones
somehow lean on our classical experience
and the textbook version certainly does
it says like you're a classical person
observing a quantum mechanical system
and so forth and Everett when he was a
graduate student you know he was he had
arguments across the ocean with people
in Copenhagen you know who tried to push
their way forward and he's like why do
you get to be classical and the electron
has to be quantum like why aren't you
quantum like why isn't everything what's
so special about you really right and he
was trying to think of the quantum
mechanics of the whole universe right
where he is not a separate observer
outside because he's doing the whole
universe all at once and so everything
had to be quantum and I think that
that's another thing that is pushing us
to appreciate the foundations of quantum
mechanics a little bit more is that
we're trying to understand quantum
gravity we're trying to understand
quantum cosmology the universe all at
once obeying the rules of quantum
mechanics and the conventional
Copenhagen theory is just not up to it
when I was reading it I was thinking a
thought came across my mind that it's
almost like the human brain is a radio
that's picking up a distant signal but
getting better and better at tuning into
it all the time and that we are thinking
of ourselves in this very limited
primitive biological way because that's
how we evolved but slowly but surely
through people like you and through work
on this stuff we're gaining this more
comprehensive view of what reality is
itself and that we're experiencing these
stages of comprehension and that that's
why I mean you know again going off of
what you're saying about your being
potentially discouraged from pursuing
these things that's why this is so
important is like for most people like
myself who don't have a background in
this at all
that the signal is so distant but it
seems like the more you folks study it
in the the more the Large Hadron
Collider in CERN and more these
experiments get done the closer we get
to just a better signal just a little
bit better signal and we might be
talking about generations from that
right exactly yeah but no I like the
analogy very much because the human
brain did not evolve to understand
quantum mechanics right it didn't
understand it involve to understand
science at all like we're and some my
best friends are human beings but we are
wonderful bundles of impulses and
heuristics and shortcuts and ways to
rationalize our behavior and stuff like
that and the idea that we can aspire to
be logical and to develop theories and
reject them and develop theories that
are very very far away from our everyday
experience is a relative late comer on
the evolutionary scene and we're still
not really good at it we're getting
better at it and this is part of it you
know quantum mechanics is the biggest
challenge that we have in physics to our
intuitive understanding of the world and
so there's a question how should we try
to understand it how much of it should
we lean on our intuitive understanding
and how much should we just accept that
the world is fundamentally SuperDuper
different that's a perfectly good
question I'm not trying to prejudice the
answer one way or the other I mean our
experience is limited but it's all we
have right we have to be based on that
and so some people wonder is quantum
mechanics just impossible to understand
like is the human brain not up to the
task the current human brain the current
human brain sure but I think that no I
think that that's totally wrong I think
that number one quantum mechanics
certainly is very understandable and
number two I don't think that anything
about nature is impossible to understand
for the current human brain I mean maybe
it is there's no way of knowing for sure
but there's zero evidence that we will
fail in our ambition to try to
understand the universe it's just hard
and it takes time look a hundred years
ago we didn't have quantum mechanics at
all like we've made enormous progress
and a hundred years is nothing even in
human life human history much less
cosmological history so don't be
impatient take time but just seems to me
that the the human understanding of the
world we live in has obviously radically
changed over the last 500 years and if
we continue to exist in this current
state or a slightly better State as
things move on it's going to get better
but quantum mechanics and quantum theory
to me almost seems like an ant trying to
understand the choices on Netflix
it's like those choices exist but the
the amp really lacks all tool being
without people like you especially
especially describing the computations
and what's been done and what we
currently understand for a regular
person with no background or even no
knowledge of it no no no one's ever
explained it to them at all yeah it's
almost outside of the realm of our
capacity for reasoning nope I gotta
disagree okay I think it's just hard I
suppose the difference I think that and
I could be wrong about this but I think
that you know there was a phase
transition there was some you know how
we talk in computer science about a
certain kind of computational machine
being touring complete I mean maybe you
don't know this but this is something we
simply say so a touring machine Alan
Turing the great computer scientist who
broke codes and things like that he also
thought a lot about like what
computation was and he invented the
Turing test for consciousness and stuff
like that for AI and for AI app and but
the touring complete is basically
there's a certain kind of computational
device that can essentially do any
computation that can be done like
anything you can ask if you can do this
problem then you can also do that
problem and there's sort of a maximal
hardness to problems and so a Turing
machine can do that problem if you give
it enough time and there's some problems
that are undoable so no machine can do
those but the doable ones can be done on
a turing-complete machine so in some
sense this is not a rigorous
fact by any stretch but I think there's
an analogy with human reasoning like at
some point we're a little bit smarter
than dogs and cats but it's not just
we're a little bit smarter we're a
different kind of smart like we did pass
a threshold we can use language we can
reason symbolically and abstractly we
can write things down and pass them down
through generations we can imagine
futures in way
that they can't so even though you know
the number of neurons or the number of
connections in our brain might not be
that different between a human being and
a chimpanzee it's a different kind of
reasoning that has been opened up we've
been become capable of this kind of
thought and I think that's enough my
idea is that we are smart enough to
understand the laws of physics whatever
they turn out to be quantum mechanics or
something beyond quantum mechanics and
to the person on the street who's never
learned anything about quantum mechanics
you know it is so different from how you
experience the world that it seems
bizarre and you do have to like read the
same paragraph over and over again
sometimes but I think it is absolutely
understandable if people make the effort
I don't think there's any person who you
know can balance their checkbook but not
understand quantum mechanics they just
need to put the time
put the time in and take your time and
come back open like don't that the the
real thing that holds people back I
think is a insisting ahead of time that
they know how things work right that
reality should work in a certain way yes
and you have to at least be open to the
possibility that the way reality works
is way different than what you had in
mind if you're open and you're willing
to put in the work you can understand
that's why I was curious as to how you
apply it in your actual physical life
your knock on wood ring a doorbell you
know drive a car physical life yeah if I
was thinking about quantum mechanics and
I was driving my car things would be
much worse than they are and that's
because the classical world is a really
good approximation and this is something
I'm also interested in yes you know
that's this is important emergence right
I talked about this in the last book in
the big picture think about this when we
when we talk about the earth going
around the Sun forget about quantum
mechanics just to just do classical
mechanics Isaac Newton earth orbiting
the Sun okay we can predict that we can
write down the equations we can tell you
where the earth was a million years ago
or a million years in the future right
but think about how amazing that is the
earth is made of something like ten to
the fiftieth atoms okay in principle to
tell you what the earth is doing I
should tell you what every one of those
atoms is doing right yeah but I have no
idea what every one of those atoms is
doing all I actually in the real world
to tell you to predict what the earth is
doing is to tell you the center of mass
of the earth where it is and where it's
moving so only using an incredibly tiny
amount of information I can make
incredibly precise and accurate
predictions I have this enormous handle
over what the world is doing ignoring
almost all the data that there is about
this persistent about the specific state
of the world
so that's emergence when you don't need
to know almost anything about a system
you have certain very very special high
leverage pieces of information that you
can use to make accurate predictions so
really now that we know quantum
mechanics all of classical physics is
like that the fact that you can throw a
baseball and know where it's gonna land
and stuff like that the fact you can get
a rocket to the moon or drive a car is
because without knowing quantum
mechanics it's because Newton's laws of
physics are a really really good
approximation that let you make
predictions without knowing the quantum
wave function of the car you're driving
right and if you needed to know the
quantum wave function of the car you
were driving you'll be hopeless it's
just you know computationally
intractable so the world appears to us
in a way that it that is very convenient
in some ways we we need to know so
little about the world to yet understand
quite a bit of it otherwise we couldn't
get through the day the idea that
everything is in motion is also very
difficult for people to wrap their brain
around you see a stationary rock on the
ground yeah you you think that rock is
still but it is not nothing is still you
know it's pretty still but it's a part
of the earth it's pretty spinning sure
the earth is spinning that relatively in
terms of the universe everything is in
motion in some way shape or form well
you know this is very this is you know a
there's a lot going on here actually
because on the one hand is tine teaches
us you know when you say something is
moving you have to say with respect to
what right right so if you're standing
next to the rock it's not moving with
respect to you right if you just
stationary there there's also what I try
to squelch in the book one of the
misunderstandings about quantum
mechanics is the idea of quantum
fluctuations the idea that an electron
sitting in the orbit of an atom is
really jiggling around there
and you don't know exactly where it is
that's not what quantum mechanics says
like if you're good Eveready in any way
of a good many worlds person there's a
wavefunction to the electron and the
wavefunction is sitting there not moving
it's really not changing appreciably
over time if you were to observe the
electron you would see it somewhere and
if you observe it multiple times would
be in different places so it looks to
you like it's jiggling around but when
you're not looking at it it's not
jiggling it's just sitting there quietly
according to quantum mechanics so is
this confusing description based on our
limited ability to perceive it's
actually based on the fact that we
inevitably attach a notion of reality to
what we do perceive right so in quantum
mechanics what we perceive is different
than what really is and that really bugs
people because I just saw it I mean how
much more real could it be right the way
that we describe you know I like to go
on a rant in a whole chapter of the book
like the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle that there's uncertainty to
either your position or your velocity
you can't know both of them at the same
time it's not that you can't know both
of them at the same time it said neither
one of them exists position and velocity
are things you measure they're not the
elements of reality that quantum
mechanics uses and there's a difference
there and people don't like that but by
the way I want to bring up again a whole
other aspect of the not moving thing
which i think is fascinating and it's
nothing to do with quantum mechanics but
it is a future frontier for physics I
think you know we can look at the bottle
of water and say like it looks pretty
stationary it's not really changing I
call so look at you and you're sitting
there pretty quietly you're not really
changing but there's a tremendous
difference because this is stationary
not moving because all of its pieces are
stationary and not moving I mean this is
liquid so it's not the best example the
table would be a better example but you
and I are sort of macroscopically
stationary trying to sit here more or
less quietly but inside there's a lot of
churn going on right there's you know a
lot of cellular biology there's ATP is
being created and destroyed and you know
signals are going from our brain and
back and forth
and someone like Antonio Damasio the
neuroscientist emphasizes this idea of
homeostasis that there is stuff going on
beneath the surface but it regulates our
particular configuration so that we are
more or less macroscopically stable and
and amazingly you know human beings last
for a century like you know we're born
and we our bodily integrity lasts for a
hundred years which is which is kind of
crazy
but it doesn't do that by in having its
individual parts remain quiet and
stationary it does that through the
arrow of time in the growth of entropy
in the fact that we eat food and get
sunlight and we use up enormous
resources for the purpose of apparently
maintaining our integrity and I think it
how that whole story works and fits
together is something in physics doesn't
understand very well but will be
important going forward the idea that
there's an an enormous number of you
making various choices yeah and that
these various choices will ultimately
affect how long you exist in some
branches so there is a weird thing
called quantum immortality which I think
is a bad idea and I don't like to talk
about it but people hear about it so I
sometimes need to mention it max tegmark
who is a friend of mine a very smart guy
popularized this idea he said look what
and it's a little bit macabre re about
this a little bit you know weird the
experiment but imagine you're doing
you're playing quantum Russian roulette
so you have your universe splitter okay
you have your app on your iphone and you
can split the universe and if it goes
one way you don't do anything if it goes
the other way faster than you can react
a machine is activated that kills you
instantly okay see you you don't even
know it you don't even perceive it you
don't have any pain you just instantly
dead and you do this over and over and
over and over and over again so in most
branches of the wavefunction you're dead
but in those you're dead you don't know
anything you don't you don't feel like
you're dead do you know there's no
regret after the fact the only version
of you that survives is the one that was
lucky enough to be in the branch where
you didn't die every single time so tech
marks argument was that if you do this
over and over again and you survive
you should take that as good evidence
that the many-worlds interpretation of
quantum mechanics is correct because in
other versions you probably just died
right I don't think that's quite right I
don't think it's a good way to go
through your life I think that the
reason why we don't want to die is not
just that we will experience pain but
that's sort of prospectively right now
the idea of being dead in the future
bothers me right like I if someone said
you know you're going to die in this and
that date might be useful information
but I'd be sad if that date was soon and
I think the same thing is true in the
quantum a mortality experiment I don't
buy the moves that says well in all the
branches where you're dead it doesn't
matter because you're dead you don't
feel anything like I think that right
now it's okay for me to be bothered by
the prospect that in many future worlds
I will not be there so I you know I
think that at the end of the day once
again you should act in quantum
mechanics just like you act in the
regular world are there competing
theories to this that this many worlds
theory that you've embraced and then
discarded yeah yeah yeah their absence
that are that are quite popular one is
more or less what Einstein had in mind
which are called hidden variable
theories so basically you know if you
have an electron and you say look when
I'm not looking at it its wave-like when
I look at it it's like particle like
maybe it's both maybe there is a wait
and there is a particle so in a hidden
variable theory there's a wave function
just like there is in many worlds but
there's also another set of variables
saying there's really a location of the
electron right maybe I don't know where
it is but there really is an electron
located somewhere and that location of
the electron is pushed around by the
wavefunction but it's a whole new part
of reality so there's not so that
there's seperate branching of the
wavefunction and all that stuff but that
none of that is reality where reality is
is where the particles are and this is
now called bohmian mechanics David Bohm
in the 1950s developed the most
respectable version of this it's sort of
therapeutic if you don't like all the
other worlds it's basically you know the
equations are the same as many worlds
except there's new equations and new
stuff so it complicates the theory by
adding new variables
the good news is it says only one of the
branches of the wavefunction is real I
don't need to worry about the other ones
the problem is it's very hard my
particular problems it's very hard to
reconcile these ideas with modern
physics like if you thought the world
was made of individual particles it
would be do ok but these days we use
quantum field theory in quantum gravity
and things like that and those more
modern ideas are harder to attach hidden
variables to so hidden variables are you
know an old idea but there I think that
they're hard to make work the other idea
which is more dramatic a little bit more
fun is every single electron has a wave
function and it seems to you that when
you observe it it collapses but but
maybe what's really going on is the
following that there's a random
probability every second that every
electron will just spontaneously
collapse so it's all spread out but it's
wave function just randomly localizes to
some particular region of space very
very rarely like if you have one
electron and you wait for it to happen
it will happen like once every hundred
million years ok but if I have lots of
electrons like in a table there's way
more than 100 million electrons in this
table there's there's you know billions
and billions and billions of electrons
so somewhere in the table all the time
an electron is localizing at one
particular position and because that
electron is entangled with all the other
electrons the table maintains a location
in space hmm and this is called
spontaneous collapse where grw Theory
after the initials of the people who
invented the theory and the great thing
about grw theory is that it's
experimentally distinguishable from many
worlds because it says that if I have a
collection of atoms even if I'm not
observing it even for not entangling it
one of the wave functions should
spontaneously localize occasionally and
that will heat it up energy is not
conserved in this theory so people are
doing experiments to test this so it's
really you know legit experimental
science atoms the current perception by
the general public of atoms is that it's
mostly empty space yes there's no idea
this is not true well we're not correct
or not it's certainly not what many
world says right so this is you know
there are two enormous problems with our
current
way of presenting quantum mechanics one
is the measurement problem which is this
question what do you mean look at it
what do you mean observe like what
actually happens when does that happen
that's the measurement problem but the
other problem is what I unhelpfully call
the ontology problem as ontology is the
philosophy of being of what is real what
is actually existing so we just talked
about hidden variable theories so in
Everett what's real is the wave function
the wave function of the universe
describes the universe exactly and
completely in many world in hidden
variable theories there's a wave
function and there's also particles so
there's extra ontology extra pieces of
reality so the question of is the atom
mostly empty space depends on what you
think is real so the wave function of
the electron fills the atom so if you're
a many-worlds person like me you think
what is real is the wave function it
fills up the atom and the atom is not
mostly empty space the atom is the wave
function it has that size right you get
the feeling that elect that atoms are
mostly empty space because you think
that really the electron is a point and
the wave function is just telling you
where you might see it when you measure
what well yes so many worlds says
there's no such thing as where it is
there's only a probability of seeing it
everyone knows that
but people kind of die it they talk as
if there really is a location of the
electron even if they should know better
so people who generally people who say
that atoms are mostly empty space are
just being sloppy they're just really
thinking of the electron as a little
tiny dot rather than a wave function
there is an exception to that because
there is a fourth version of quantum
mechanics that is somewhat popular I
said three I said many world's hidden
variables and spontaneous collapse
there's another version that just says
look the wave function has nothing to do
with reality in many worlds it's all of
reality in spontaneous collapse it's all
a reality but it opens in hidden
variables the wave function is part of
reality but there's also particles in
the other approach which is called an
epistemic approach to quantum mechanics
the wave function is just a way of
talking about
your personal knowledge of the world
your knowledge or lack of knowledge
you're ignorant of the world so your
wave functions just a tool you use to
make a prediction for what the
experimental outcome is going to be
right and that's more or less what we
teach our students and this approach
says don't bother about reality what we
should concern ourselves with is the
experiences of agents who make
predictions and update their probability
expectations of the world and so someone
like that if you ask them you know how
is an electron located in an atom or how
is it an atom mostly empty space I think
if they're honest they would say don't
ask those questions those are no we
don't ask reality questions we just ask
what are you gonna see kinds of
questions but I think that some of the
less honest ones will say sure atom is
mostly empty space because an electron
has location somewhere we just don't
know what it is why do they approach it
in this what you the way you're
describing a sloppy way
why do you think that is so common well
you know it is part of the attitude that
physics is physicists have adopted that
we use quantum mechanics but we don't
try very hard to understand it so you
can talk to plenty of physicists on the
street and they will tell you to your
face that understanding reality is not
their job and I think that's terrible
but they will say it and so when you
press them too much on questions like
you know is the atom mostly empty space
you know what happens to be making
observation they just kind of get
uncomfortable and say no you're asking
the wrong questions
let's ask questions about what will we
see if the Large Hadron Collider if we
smash protons together right and those
are perfectly good questions too but I
think that the what's really going on
questions are also interesting so
because they don't care about these
questions they will often be sloppy and
answering them right they don't you
it is hard light like you said it's it's
hard when you read the book it's hard
when you write the book it's hard when
you think about these things as a
professional physicist it's it's not
natural it's not easy it's not intuitive
so even if you're a super-duper expert
at solving the equations and making
predictions
understanding what's going on is a whole
nother activity that a lot of physicists
don't try very hard to do now how was
all this stuff verified or argued like
say here come you're sitting down you're
having a conversation with someone who
espouses a competing theory how are you
guys working this out good I think that
if everything were going along really
really well we would be making
experimental predictions and testing
them but I think the theorists have sort
of dropped the ball here in the sense
that the theoretical physicists should
have since the 1930s been developing
these alternatives like many world's
hidden variables whatever and make using
them to make predictions but we really
haven't they were neglected they were
back waters there are a few people a few
plucky souls who really put their
efforts into understanding these many of
them got pushed out into philosophy
departments but that's what we need to
do we need to like catch up on the last
70 years of lost time and work out what
the implications are of these ideas so
it's in the ball I think is in the
theorists court the experimenters are
working hard experimenters are doing
amazing things with lasers and atoms and
learning about how to manipulate quantum
systems at a delicate level but the
theorists have not given them sharp
experimental questions that they that
would really illuminate the foundations
of quantum mechanics so honestly what it
is is a bunch of people get around a
table and talk to each other they're
like alright I think that what happens
when the wavefunction branches is this
so a typical question will try to
address is in ordinary quantum mechanics
we say if I send the electron through
one way or I sent it through the elect
the other way there's a 50/50 chance
that I will see it go left or go right
and someone says what do you mean 50/50
chance especially in many worlds where
there's a 100 percent chance there'll be
a world where it goes left in a world
where it goes right how what what is the
meaning of the phrase there's a 50/50
chance what is the nature of probability
in this game where everything is
perfectly deterministic right so that's
not the kind of question that you answer
very easily by doing an experiment you
have to think about it so that's what
the kind of thing that we
argue about how often you guys get
together um yeah you know it happens
there's conferences it's a small
community someone asked me just the
other day you know the book came out
something deeply hidden last week and
I'm been on a book tour so I was on I
was being interviewed and someone said
how many people do you think in the
world are would classify themselves as
working on the foundations of quantum
mechanics maybe a hundred something like
that not a very large number like if you
say how many people would classify
themselves as particle physicists do be
tens of thousands I remember there's a
woman who came to the comedy store
after the last podcast that we did and
she apparently is also working on it and
she was trying to explain it to me her
version of it you know after hearing
your version of it was very similar but
I believe she was from Romania
so she was struggling a little bit with
English okay so excited to discuss it
it's so fascinating when you see someone
who's like for the limited number of how
many of you guys there are and gals
there are out there I mean whatever the
number is when that spark gets ignited
and other people start tuning into it
she was so excited that this was being
discussed on a podcast and she wanted to
talk to me about yet to say you know
please have more people on please talk
about this more you know we need support
we need you know it's it is it's it does
baffle me a little bit how difficult it
is swimming uphill to get more support
for this kind of thing because it is
just an enormous privilege to be able to
call your job thinking about the
fundamental nature of reality right like
you know I gave my first book tour talk
was last Tuesday and I had dinner the
night before with you know several
philosophers of physics in the New York
area if you know from Columbia NYU and
ever and and you know we're all friends
and we could talk about you know our
cats and our cars but every single word
discussed at the table all night long
was about the philosophy of physics is
it because you guys work in isolation
essentially and then when you get
together you just you're so pumped up to
be discussing these things like minded
Souls you know in part yeah I mean I
there's no one else
in the physics department at Caltech who
cares about these issues I mean some of
them care in the sense that they are
happy that I'm doing it but no one does
it well itselves
yeah well there's a couple other people
in the philosophy department who care
about these and the folks you were
saying get pushed into philosophy and
why is that I mean is it just because
it's so complex that it's so esoteric
there's so many people that just they do
the the support for its not there but
the support for philosophy is more
common in mainstream yeah you know
there's different kinds of support one
kind of support in academia is who do
you hire right what what areas do you
want like a physics department will
generally say yeah we should have some
people doing particle physics some
people doing astrophysics some people
doing condensed matter in solid-state
physics and and then and then it becomes
hard do we need people doing biophysics
do we need people doing this and by the
time they get to the foundations of
quantum mechanics there's there's
usually very little support philosophers
there their job is being patient and
clarifying difficult conceptual
questions and so they get that quantum
mechanics is fertile territory for
philosophy like it you know one of the
big problems in philosophy compared to
science is that many of the questions
that they're asking cannot be tested
experimentally right what is infinity
well you know it's hard to do an
experiment there but it's an important
question right and so you need patience
but also it's harder to make progress
because it's easy to be trapped by your
intuition right like when it's just you
thinking and trying to think hard and be
rational and so forth it's easy to fall
into a trap of well this looks
reasonable to me and quantum mechanics
doesn't look reasonable to anybody so
it's a wonderful corrective it's a
wonderful reality check when you think
well reality has to be this way and then
someone can say well look at quantum
mechanics that's different than what you
said so philosophy and quantum mechanics
they sort of they they share some sort
of a border yeah oh yeah absolutely I
mean the things so I I was always a big
fan of philosophy ever since I was an
undergraduate and I discovered it for
the first time but when I was
undergraduate and my favorite philosophy
classes were like the philosophy of
morale
your political philosophy right I took
philosophy of science classes but they
seem to be kind of dry to me because
they were all about how scientific
theories are constructed and chosen you
know the structure of scientific
revolutions is the famous book that
everyone reads people like Thomas Kuhn
and Paula abend and so forth and okay
that's interesting but it's sort of meta
science right it's like how science is
done not how the world works and it
wasn't until you know circa 2000 that I
discovered that there are philosophers
of physics who are kind of really doing
physics you know that they're not asking
how physics works they're asking how the
world works but they're asking in a way
that is comfortably located in
philosophy departments and right now not
so much in physics departments there was
a part of the book that that shocked me
because I had a ridiculous idea once and
this idea was not my idea apparently La
Paz had a very similar idea as a thought
experiment I had an idea once that if
one day there was a computer that was so
powerful that it could accurately
describe every single object on earth
that we would be able to figure out the
past and La Paz was saying that not only
that would he propose for the entire
universe like every single object
electron everything in the atom in the
entire universe that you would not only
be able to show the past but also
predict the future that's right so this
is called Laplace's daemon although he
never called to that pier Simone Laplace
was a brilliant guy he deserves to be
much more well known so I base I think
I've mentioned him is his name in every
book that I've ever written for totally
different reasons he helped invent
probability as we currently understand
it for example but yeah so Isaac Newton
came up with the rules of classical
mechanics in the 1600s but it wasn't
until Laplace around the Year 1800 that
this implication of classical mechanics
was realized it's a clockwork universe
that the way classical mechanics works
is if you tell me the state of a system
right now at one moment by which in
classical mechanics you would mean the
position and the velocity of every part
and you knew the laws of physics and you
had arbitrarily large computational
capacity
Laplace said of vast intelligence okay
then to that vast intelligence the past
and future would be as determined and
known as the present was because that's
the clockwork universe is deterministic
everything is fixed once you know the
present moment now quantum mechanics
comes along and throws a spanner into
the works a little bit if you're a
many-worlds person Laplace is demon is
still possible so if you know the wave
function of the universe exactly and you
have infinite calculational capacity you
could predict the past and the future
with perfect accuracy but what you're
predicting is all of the branches of the
wavefunction so any individual person
inside the wavefunction still
experiences apparently random events
right so you can't predict what will
happen to you even if you can predict
what will happen to the entire universe
whew Shawn care my goodness there's a
lot of people pause in this podcast
right now just shaking their head like
you know I wrote a little article that
just appeared in quantum magazine which
by the way if anyone here is a science
fan quantum magazine is the best online
magazine for science these days they
have really really good high-level our
articles about all sorts of things and
so I wrote an article called what is
probability because you know again this
is a philosophers kind of question like
you know physicist will just put it to
use and get on with their lives
philosophers will say well what do you
really mean by probability the
traditional answer is if you're flipping
a coin and you say it's 5050 what you
mean by that is that if you flipped it
an infinite number of times half the
time it would be heads half the time it
would be tails that's what you mean it's
called the frequentist idea probability
but then what do you say like well what
is the probability that Donald Trump
wins re-election that's not gonna happen
infinite number of times you're not
gonna do the experiment or even better
what was the probability that Lee Harvey
Oswald actually was the lone shooter of
JFK that already happened that's in the
past right right but we can easily say
well I think it was an 80% chance that
that's true right so this is called
Bayesian probability where rather than
thinking of an infinite number of things
going on you're assigning a degree of
confidence
to your lack of perfect knowledge right
like I don't know exact there's
something yeah there's something going
on I don't know what it is so I assign a
probability and and that just like a
frequency that you know those the the
credence as we say that you assigned to
these different ideas is a positive
number then all the credence is add up
to one because something happened so in
quantum mechanics is is probability more
like frequentist probability or is it
more like Bayesian probability the
answer is it depends on what your
favorite version of quantum mechanics is
in one of these spontaneous collapse
theories it's very much like a frequency
like you know you just things happen
randomly and it's purely objective in
something like many world well sorry I
should say in something like hidden
variables its Laplace is demon all over
again so the Laplace is demon doesn't
work in a spontaneous collapse theory
because you the laws of physics are not
deterministic you don't know when things
are gonna collapse all by themselves in
a hidden variable theory the hidden
variables and the wavefunction of all
deterministically but you don't know
what the hidden variables are so you can
assign some probability to having them
be different things so there's some
ignorant involved many-worlds is the
coolest idea because it's it's kind of
then this is what is kind of hard to
wrap your mind around on the one hand
there is only the wavefunction
it describes the universe exactly but
imagine that I measure the spin of an
electron okay so I actually do know what
the wavefunction is going to evolve into
it's going to evolve into a 50/50 split
of I observed that spinning up and I
observed it spinning down and then but I
only ever find myself in one side or the
other so there is always a moment in
between when the wavefunction splits and
when I know about it it splits much
faster than I can know about it the the
rate the speed of a wavefunction
branching is some incredibly tiny number
ten to the minus twenty seconds or
something like that and the timescale of
things happening in my brain is like 10
to the minus 3 seconds at best okay so
there will always be a time when there
are two copies of being one on the
branch where the spin was up one on the
branch where the spin was down
but they're both identical they don't
know which branch they're on yet so they
need to be good Bayesian z' and say well
what probability should I assign that
I'm on one branch or the other and it
turns out that the probabilities work
exactly like the textbook quantum
mechanics tells you the probabilities
should work out how's that the wave
function squared is the probabilities so
there's a u function squared this is a
rule called the born rule after max born
who was a physicist who invented it so I
mean read the book of course but like
like you said it to very start the
history of quantum mechanics is just so
fascinating in hilarious Schrodinger
urban furniture of Schrodinger's cat
Fame invented the idea of the wave
function and wrote down the equation
that it obeys okay but what he hoped was
that if you had the wave function of
electron all by itself if you solved his
equation it would sort of show that the
wave function becomes localized peaked
at one location the electron kind of
acts like a point particle and that's
why we see particles that was his hope
what actually happens when you solve the
equation is that the electron spreads
out all throughout the universe so he
was his hope was dashed and then he's
like alright I had this equation what is
it like what is the wave function do and
it was max born a whole nother guy who
said what the wave function does is you
square it and that's the probability of
seeing something somewhere like if the
wave function looks like this it's some
spread out thing there's very small
probability over here and large
probability over there because the
probability is the wave function squared
and Schrodinger said like oh my god
that's awful I'm sad I had anything to
do with it he regretted happy being
involved with this whole idea of
probabilities and collapses and all that
stuff
do you see an increased interest in this
subject among students I mean is this
this seems like I do very yeah I do but
you know with things like that it's
always hard to you know protect against
my own biases right like I see the
people who are interested come to me
because I I keep talking about it right
and maybe I'm you know ruining their
lives by getting them interested in it
you know when I have real graduate
students I try not to let them work on
topics like this too much like a little
bit you get their foot wet but they got
to work on respectable stuff that will
get them a job also
that's interesting so you're protecting
them oh yeah no I I'm I really try mixed
success of course but I try very hard to
be a good advisor in the sense that you
know you know challenge them
intellectually and get them through
interesting things but in a way that
will lead to a productive career and
part of that is get a job right like you
know I'm not a believer in being such an
idealist that you stop doing physics by
the time you're out of graduate school
yeah keep going do you think it's
possible to boil this down to a
documentary that isn't filled with whoo
like a just a response to something like
what the bleep some sort of entertaining
yet clear version of what you're saying
I think so ya know if there's any
producers out there who want to option
my book jump in you know I think it's
especially these days when computer
graphics are really good right and we
can visualize things yeah we couldn't
our yeah that and that was in fact I
think that you got a copy of my book
that didn't have any figures in it right
didn't you get the oh yeah and that
makes it much harder than real the real
book has pictures yeah I'm sorry I
should have brought a copy is that out
last week okay so it is out now we'll
send you a copy then oh that'll be
better but honestly all the pictures in
the book were made by me using adobe
illustrator and this is not really my
area of expertise so it's not like
high-level graphics it's just barely
functional yeah especially you know
there's so much history in there I had
the idea before I actually wrote this
book I was seriously contemplating
writing a novel about the borer Einstein
debates because they were nominally
about the nature of quantum mechanics
but they were really about the nature of
reality
right and there's all sorts of the
history is interesting you know there
were Nazis for talk about the 1930s
right Einstein fled Germany the
personalities are very different and you
know Bohr Niels Bohr is this amazing
figure I had David Albert on my podcast
on mindscape and the same David Albert
who appeared in what the bleep and we
talked about quantum mechanics in the
measurement problem
and you know he said he put it really
well he said like if there's a figure
from history who I would like to have
dinner with it would be Niels Bohr and
because like he was certainly a very an
amazingly good physicist very very
influential but over and over again
SuperDuper smart people would get
together and talk to Niels Bohr and come
away spouting nonsense about the
foundations of quantum mechanics somehow
he had this magic charisma that worked
in a bad direction to like make people
just become crazy about quantum
mechanics in a bad way and that's part
of the reason why we haven't dug into
the foundations of quantum theory why
what was it about him he was just
incredibly charismatic in a weird way
because he was a terrible writer you
know there's this story where he Heinz
Stein wrote this paper about
entanglement and spooky action at a
distance
and Bohr responded to it and everyone
said you know cuz by this time 1935
people were already bored with the
foundations of quantum mechanics and
they didn't want to think about it so if
anyone said well what about Einstein's
worries they would just say Oh Bohr
wrote a paper don't worry about it and
Bohr's paper was reprinted in this you
know book you could buy and then you
could read it and the pages were printed
in the wrong order and no one noticed
and like it's just hard to make sense of
what he said so he would pretend to
understand what I was saying even though
it was in the wrong order that's how
weird it is yeah that's and that's how
bad a communicator he was but in person
everyone loved him like John Wheeler who
is who Everett's advisor was a sort of
an acolyte aboard he he their sentences
he said like I never knew what people
meant when they talked about people like
Jesus or Socrates or Buddha until I met
Niels Bohr hmm so he had some magnetism
he had that's why that's why I David
Albert wanted to like mean him he's like
what what did that guy have like what
was it like to talk to him that people
loved him so much even though he was
kind of wrong about the formation the
clock mechanics but it's at least
someone who's charismatic who has that
sort of enigmatic personality at least
it could spark interest yeah that's
right so you know part of
the reason I wanted to write this book
is I it's very much like you know
another thing I do is go around and talk
about science and religion and I'm an
atheist myself so I say that you know
science leads us to not believe in God
and I talk about this to very different
audiences churches and things like that
sometimes how's that going well it
depends very much on the age of the
person in the audience is the thing
older people like they made up their
minds they're not they're not going to
change but young people even a very very
very religious young people are
fascinated by what I have to say it's
not that they changed their mind right
away but I've never heard someone put it
that way before right and maybe they do
change their mind later maybe not but at
least they've heard a perspective that
they were not exposed to earlier I think
the same thing is true with quantum
mechanics like there's a buttload of
books about quantum mechanics on the
market there's no shortage of books
about quantum mechanics but they're
mostly with this spirit of isn't this
bizarres and this weird we'll never
understand it and I think that that many
many people who grew up to be physicists
this is what they're doing when they're
12 years old they're reading these books
right and so I wanted to write a book
which said like actually we could maybe
understand this if we just tried it's
not ineffably mysterious let's let's you
know be embarrassed that the field of
physics has not put its effort into it
and make an effort here and so maybe
that will so that's what my you know
most ambitious hope for a book like this
is that 20 years from now there'll be a
flood of young physicists who think this
is really interesting
yeah well the number what would you
estimate it would be currently like how
many people do you think yeah it's of
order a hundred that's it I think so
yeah like you know when we have
conferences there's often 12 people
there or 20 people holy shit maybe
there's more because I haven't met them
all but it always depends on how you
draw the boundaries also whereas yeah
there's thousands or tens of thousands
of people in most subfields of physics
so I mean why would you go into the
subfield where there's no money or
promotion yes but still that's stunning
when you hear that it's somewhere around
100 I mean we have here in California we
have sequin the California quantum
interpretation Network which is a group
of us you know
people we know in California who care
about these issues and meet to talk
about them and it's like 15 people Wow
and weekend it depends on where you draw
the boundaries and so forth but funny
you guys kicks the bucket I know that's
how we get to brink get new blood in
there yeah it's but like I said I do
think it's it's growing it's expanding
and I'm optimistic I tend to be
optimistic you know there is this yeah I
alluded to a before but let's emphasize
it we turned on the Large Hadron
Collider in 2009 we turned it on in 2008
and then it exploded we fixed it and
turn it on again in 2009 and it found
the Higgs boson in 2012 and it didn't
find anything else and that's bad that's
bad for physics in a big way because
it's great that we had a theory that was
the king true with the Higgs boson but
in some sense we learned from the Large
Hadron Collider the smallest amount it
was possible for us to learn there's a
Higgs boson and that's it about quark
gluon plasma yeah that's great but we
knew it was there I mean we'll learn
details about it but the fundamental
underlying laws that give rise to that
we've known since the 70s hmm
so there's a million things we learned
about you know like for the
gravitational waves for measuring the
Higgs boson we pin down numbers we
measure the Cosmic Microwave Background
the leftover radiation from the Big Bang
but you would like something more that
you could bring to people saying that
this is very very valuable and tangible
stuff well not just that I wanted to
make progress right so we had good
reason to think that there should be a
bunch of other particles that you
discover at the Large Hadron Collider
and they weren't there
meanwhile we have very good reason to
think that 25% of the matter in the
universe is dark matter 25% of the
energy in the universe and we had very
good reason to hope that we could detect
it by now in an underground laboratory
and we haven't and it's there but it's
beyond our reach somehow so it's just so
hard to make progress under these
circumstances and meanwhile we have big
cool ideas like string theory that are
hard to connect to the real world so
this is the last third of the book to me
is you know again like I have my
favorite
ideas but there's a bigger picture about
what kinds of ideas we should pursue and
how we should pursue them so the last
sort of the book is maybe we need to
understand quantum mechanics to better
understand quantum gravity in the theory
of everything you know like what should
how should we expect to understand
quantum gravity if we don't understand
quantum mechanics come on all right and
what was the motivation behind starting
your podcast
it's called mine scapes mindscape yeah
mindscape um yeah I've been having lots
of fun with the podcast it's been great
and several episodes about quantum
mechanics most recently just last week I
did a whole two-hour solo episode on how
space-time can emerge from quantum
mechanics the I'll tell you that the
motivation was when I wrote my previous
book the big picture it was a sprawling
book so it's not only physics but also
philosophy and neuroscience and biology
and math and computer science there's a
whole bunch of things in there that I'm
not an expert on I'm a big believer that
people should talk about things they're
not an expert on but they should talk
about them in some sense of humility
that I don't understand everything here
so I will talk to some experts right so
I went around talking to experts so you
know I interviewed people I had so much
fun because I was writing a book I could
literally just email a Nobel
prize-winning biologist and say could I
drop by and talk to you for an hour and
they'd say yes and when the book was
done that went away I can't I can't I
don't have license to just call people
up randomly and say could I talk to you
for an hour I have a podcast and
suddenly you know people want to talk to
you right so I've gotten you know I
talked to Wynton Marsalis the the
trumpet player right you know the
grammy-winning trumpet player I talked
to Seth MacFarlane the other day I
plucked Nobel Prize winners MacArthur
prize winners philosophers biologists
documentary filmmakers it's I just
really have a blast
so yeah this podcasting thing I think is
gonna take off you should look into it
yeah it's well for me I mean there's no
way I would be able to get someone like
you sit down explain things like this
without a podcast well it is a it's
taking advantage I think right I mean
I'm not telling you this let's say we're
telling the audience this but it's it's
your
we can talk as long as we want right let
you take advantage of this better than
anybody and it's different it doesn't
replace things like books okay look like
books are always where you can get into
the weeds a little bit maybe a little
bit more specific a little bit more
careful but there's a long road you know
there's a lot of books out there I'm not
gonna read all of them that was the
other motivation behind starting my own
podcast is that I had a stack of books I
wanted to read and to force myself to
read them I would invite the author on
to the podcast but I can't read all
those books which books should I read
you know there's there's a whole you
know journey to saying oh like this is
important enough I should dedicate
myself to a week of my time to reading
this book and hearing people talk about
it in an informal setting is you know
both illuminating but also like oh yeah
there's ideas in there I really need to
get to so I'm a big believer in diverse
ecosystems I like Twitter I like little
YouTube videos I like podcasts I like
books I like talks there's all sorts of
ways to get this information yeah I
think it's opened up the interest in a
far broader group of human beings too
because in having conversations like
this with you or with you know the
hundreds of people that I get to talk to
in a regular basis it sparks ideas in
people that you know in their seemingly
mundane existence maybe just wouldn't
ever get in there and it allows these
new areas of inquiry in the new areas
for them personally to go look into and
I get messages and meet people all the
time I tell me how much it's changed the
way they view things because they've now
been exposed to interesting information
that's sort of sparked their their their
view of the world in a different way
ignite at different parts of their
imagination and absolutely and including
me like literally yesterday
one of the areas that I had hoped to get
onto mindscape podcast is economics I'm
very intersting economics but I realized
I don't know crap about economics like
I'm not interested in you know the trade
deal or what interest rate the Fed
should set and the problem in economics
is it's too relevant to the real world
so people want to talk about you know
Terry policy and things like that but I
want to talk about the underlying
theoretical ideas right and I realized I
just it's hard to get those so I
downloaded some economics podcasts and I
started listening them and this happens
to me all the time when this new good
podcast I'm in the car and I have to
stop it
to think about what just happened
because you know they gave me they said
something and it gave me an idea and the
great thing about being a physicist is
there's some relationship between what I
do for a living and almost everything
else right like whether it's economics
or biology or philosophy so I can only
say like hmm that's an interesting idea
I wonder if I should you know write a
paper about that so and I wouldn't have
done that very easily without the
podcast format ya know it's a really
interesting time it's a really exciting
time to spread information it's a really
exciting time to find things that you're
interested in yeah and also you know I
always noticed this about the Internet
in general which is that it calls you on
your crap a little bit right like before
the Internet you know you could have
opinions about things and you could
spout off to your friends and you know
over the dinner table or whatever over
drinks and suddenly when I started
having a blog and I would spout off and
people would say like yeah you're full
of shit like what are you talking about
you say that you know sit back and think
like oh maybe I am full of shit like
where did I get that idea right yeah and
I think that despite all the
misinformation etc that's out there if
you are intellectually responsible and
want to get things right putting your
ideas out there in public to be
critiqued is a wonderful tool it really
does
oh yeah so like it helps you figure out
like what I do understand and know and
what just were kind of vague ideas that
somehow got into my brain for no good
reason
yeah if you're open to the the the
floodgates that's the problem is there's
so much feedback it's it's really hard
to separate the wheat and the chaff it
is yeah and you know different people
have different strategies like when I
talk to Seth MacFarlane he it was
interesting he reads the comments like
he wants to know we have like 12 million
Twitter fault I mean and he hates it
he's like it's poisonous and toxic and
but he reads that and and and you know
for good reasons he's like look I'm
creating a
laughs if I don't know what the people
I'm trying to reach think about it what
is the point it's like much like me and
physics like the kind of physics I do is
not building a better machine or curing
cancer right it's only because human
curiosity leads us there so if I don't
tell other people about it
what's the point and but we did have a
conversation about blocking people on
Twitter because I was like the only
reason why I like Twitter it's got every
one who is a jerk you know like if they
make my Twitter experience less pleasant
they get blocked right away yeah that's
a good move yeah there's a lot of loud
noise and there's a lot of wonderful
people I've met wonderful people like
half of my podcast guests come because I
you know got to know their Twitter feeds
and yeah yeah yeah I've read a lot of
other people's things
I don't read any of my stuff coming at
me it just it got too overwhelming after
a while it also it interferes with the
time that you have to put stuff out
because people get wrapped up in
responding to their mentions or reading
their matches and there's an
extraordinary amount of time that you
can waste you in that yeah I mean that's
the secret like people ask like you know
how can I spend so much time on Twitter
and like what are you talking about like
I spent five minutes a day on Twitter
yeah tweeting and maybe another 15
minutes reading other people's tweets
and zero time responding to tweets
that's the secret like if you yes
Twitter is a terrible medium for
conversing right you just can't be
precise you can easily misunderstand
people easily become aggressive jerks
right it's the worst possible way to
have it back and forth unless you
already know somebody and are just
trying to clarify something so I use it
for linking to things like I say twitter
is for linking up for thinking it's yeah
it's like the hierarchy of communication
top of the food chain is one-on-one
talking just two people having
conversation and especially without any
sort of heightened sense of importance
or anger or frustration with that other
person just two people talking that's
number one like to do with no gravity
right number two is probably phone calls
like calling someone they don't see them
it's not as good you know but like being
in front of someone physically
one-to-one is the best way to do it
which is one of the reasons why I love
podcasts as well
because you get a chance to put that
energy out there the energy of a
one-on-one actual conversation with
people as opposed to writing an article
like you know that I'm sure you've had
snarky articles written about you it's
it's weird it's like well that why are
you saying it that well determine my
thoughts and and I've almost gotten to
the point where I never respond to those
not get a lot of them I mean I got a lot
of them when you started the podcast was
it always in a studio or did you do
things remotely back in the day it's
always we've only had a few
conversations remotely through Skype and
one of them was with this Egyptologist
John Anthony West who was in poor health
he since passed away and then we
eventually did get him into the podcast
studio but I started doing it in my
house and just with friends we yeah it
was there was no grand ideas when ii got
started it was just comics fucking
around and then slowly but surely but
what if that guy would talk to me became
what it is yeah i mean i am still a
health ft portion of my interviews are
still remotely cuz like i want to get
this person oklahoma and yeah whatever
but i totally think that you know it's
much better if you're in person so yeah
I can do that
yeah like I love my little podcast
portable podcast studio around so if I
like going to Boston in a few weeks I'm
going to try to get like ten people oh
yeah no that's great man I'm excited
you're doing it and well and thank you
for writing the book and thank you for
coming in here and talked about it and
if people want to get your podcast it's
available on iTunes it's whatever
broadcaster sold yeah anything else uh
many things but you know this is good
yeah the podcast in the book or the
things I'm here all right
well always a pleasure Sean thanks a lot
thanks for being here
bye everybody
[Music]
[Applause]